Oswald the CIA and Mexico City written
by Dan hardway and Edwin Lopez House
Select Committee on assassinations this
version has gone through three rounds of
declassification it was originally
released by the CIA in 1993 the
remaining redactions were reviewed by
the John F Kennedy assassination records
Review Board in November 1995 and again
in October 1996 publishers note
redactions and the following text are
read into this recording as redacted
EndNote section 1 introduction a issues
addressed the House Select Committee on
assassinations investigation into Lee
Harvey Oswald's activities in Mexico
City has been directed at answering the
following questions one did Lee Harvey
Oswald visit the Soviet and Cuban
consulates or embassies in Mexico City
two in addition to the visits which may
have been made to the embassies what
were Lee Harvey Oswald's activities
while he was in Mexico City three was
Lee Harvey Oswald alone in Mexico City
if not who were his associates and what
were their activities for did the
Central Intelligence Agency maintain any
surveillance operation aimed at the
Cuban and Soviet diplomatic missions in
Mexico City if so what kind five what
information if any about Oswald's stay
in Mexico was known by the CIA Mexico
City station prior to the assassination
and what was the source of that
information six was the information if
any in the possession of the CIA Mexico
City station reported to the CIA
headquarters accurately and
expeditiously prior to the assassination
seven was the information in the
possession of the CIA Mexico City
station reported to the CIA headquarters
accurately and expeditiously after the
assassination eight was the information
developed by the CIA in Mexico City
communicated to the Warren Commission in
an accurate and expeditious manner nine
did the CIA photo surveillance of the
Cuban and Soviet diplomatic compounds in
Mexico City
if such photo surveillance existed
obtained a photograph of Lee Harvey
Oswald if so what became of that
photograph be differences between the
Warren Commission investigation of Lee
Harvey Oswald's activities in Mexico
City and the House Select Committee on
assassinations investigation the
approach taken by this committees
investigation differs from that of the
Warren Commission primarily in terms of
scope the Warren Commission and the
investigative agencies at its disposal
went to great lengths to establish
Oswald's travel to and from Mexico but
devoted minimal effort to evaluating
Oswald's contacts with the Cuban and
Soviet consulates
it is the conclusion of this committee
that the Warren Commission correctly
established that Oswald handed traveled
to Mexico City
hence this committee has chosen not to
reinvestigate Oswald's travel to and
from Mexico City instead the committee's
approach has been to focus narrowly on
Oswald's contacts with the Soviet and
Cuban diplomatic missions in Mexico City
and on evidence that was not available
to the Warren Commission that could
possibly shed light on Oswald's
activities in Mexico City outside of the
Soviet and Cuban installations the
Warren Commission limited its discussion
of Oswald's contacts with the Soviet and
Cuban diplomatic missions to information
obtained from Silvia Duran and the Cuban
government footnote C Warren Report
pages 299 304 733 through 736
in support of its account of Oswald's
contacts with the Soviet and Cuban
diplomatic missions the Warren
Commission published the following as
exhibits one a note from the Cuban
Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Swiss
ambassador in Cuba commissioned exhibit
two four four five - Lee Harvey Oswald's
visa application and the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Cuba's letter denying the visa
Commission exhibit two five six four
three letterhead memorandum to Jay Lee
Rankin from Richard Helms re technical
examination of photographs of Lee Harvey
Oswald's application for a Cuban visa
Commission exhibit three one two seven
four the pages of Lee Harvey Oswald's
notebook with the telephone numbers of
the Cuban consulate the Soviet consulate
and the Soviet military attache office
commissioned exhibit two one two one
five a letter dated November 9th 1963
from Lee Harvey Oswald to the Soviet
embassy in Washington DC Commission
exhibit 15 6 a letter from J Edgar
Hoover to the Warren Commission listing
the contents of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation's file holdings on Lee
Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination
Commission exhibit 834 this document
listed a Central Intelligence Agency
release dated October 9th 1963 that
reported Oswald's contact with the
Soviet embassy in Mexico City
7 a memorandum dated May 14 1964 to the
United States Embassy in Mexico City
from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for
Mexico Commission exhibit 2 1 2:08
a memorandum dated June 9th 1964 from
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Mexico to the United States Embassy in
Mexico City Commission exhibit 2 1 2 3 9
a letterhead memorandum to Jay Lee
Rankin from Richard Helms REE hours of
work at the Cuban and Soviet consulates
Commission exhibit 2 5 6 8
end footnote at one point in the report
the Commission referred to other
information quote by far the most
important confirmation of signora
Darrin's
testimony however has been supplied by
confidential sources of extremely high
reliability available to the United
States and Mexico the information from
these sources establishes that her
testimony was truthful and accurate in
all material respects the identities of
these sources cannot be disclosed
without destroying their future
usefulness to the United States
end quote the Warren Commission did not
print anything in the 26 volumes of
evidence to support its statements that
Silvia Durant's testimony was confirmed
by confidential sources of extremely
high reliability in an attempt to answer
the questions posed by Lee Harvey
Oswald's visit to Mexico City in
September and October of 1963 the House
Select Committee on assassinations has
pursued the following investigative
procedure one conducted extensive
interviews depositions and executive
session hearings involving Central
Intelligence Agency personnel to
interviewed Cuban citizens who could
have knowledge of Oswald sojourn in
Mexico three interviewed Mexican
citizens who could have knowledge of
Oswald's activities and associations
while he was in Mexico four conducted an
extensive review of the files of the
Central Intelligence Agency and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation that
pertained to Oswald and Mexico City si
conclusions
one someone who identified himself as
Lee Harvey Oswald called the Soviet
consulate on 1st of October 1963 this
individual indicated that he had visited
the Soviet consulate at least once other
evidence from the CIA wiretap and
witness testimony indicates that the
individual visited the Soviet and Cuban
consulate on five or six different
occasions
while the majority of the evidence tends
to indicate that this individual was
indeed Lee Harvey Oswald the possibility
that someone else used Lee Harvey
Oswald's name during this time in
contacts with the Soviet and Cuban
consulate cannot be absolutely dismissed
to this committee has not been able to
determine Lee Harvey Oswald's activities
outside of the Cuban and Soviet
embassies with certainty there is a
report which has not been confirmed
indicating that during his stay in
Mexico
Oswald attended a twist party at the
home of reuben duran navarro the
brother-in-law of sylvia duran there is
also unconfirmed evidence which if true
would indicate that oswald spent one
night and parts of two days with a group
of pro-castro students from the
University of Mexico three there is a
report that Oswald may have been in the
company of a tall thin blond headed man
while in Mexico this report has not been
confirmed if true it is possible that
this same individual may on occasion
have used Oswald's name in dealing with
the Cuban and Soviet confluence the
man's name if there was such a man is
not known for on the dates that Oswald
was in Mexico the CIA had photographic
surveillance operations which covered
entrances to the Soviet embassy and the
Cuban embassy and consulate the CIA also
had electronic surveillance on
telephones in the Soviet consulate and
military anti Shay's office and Cuban
diplomatic compounds the telephone at
the Cuban consulate was not subject to
that surveillance five the CIA's Mexico
City station definitely knew of Oswald's
contacts with both the Soviet and Cuban
diplomatic compounds and of his desire
to obtain an in transit visa for travel
to Russia via Cuba the source of this
information was the electronic
surveillance on the Soviet consulate and
Soviet military anti Shay's office
six all information in the possession of
the CIA Mexico City station was not
reported to CIA headquarters in an
accurate and expeditious manner prior to
the assassination seven with the
exception of a few possibly benign
irregularities and considering the
possibility that not all of the
information available to the station has
been provided to this committee the
information in the possession of the CIA
Mexico station was reported in an
accurate and expeditious manner after
the assassination to headquarters eight
with the exception of those areas that
involved sensitive sources and methods
such as the information pertaining to
the electronic and photographic
surveillance of the Soviet and Cuban
diplomatic compounds information
developed by the CIA in Mexico was
generally relayed to the Warren
Commission in an accurate and
expeditious manner 9 it is the
conclusion of this committee that the
CIA's photo surveillance operations in
Mexico City
probably obtained a photograph of Lee
Harvey Oswald entering either or both
the Soviet and Cuban consulates the CIA
denies that such a photograph exists
hence the disposition of this photograph
is unknown 10 the CIA telephone
surveillance on the Soviet embassy taped
several calls of a man using the name
Lee Oswald these tapes were retained for
a routine two-week period and were most
likely erased
shortly after 16th of October 1963 these
tapes were probably in existence at the
time of the assassination 11 the
committee is aware of the allegations
that Sylvia tirado de Duran may have
been an intelligence agent for either
the Cubans Mexicans or Americans mr. an
was probably never employed by Cuban
intelligence while there is no direct
evidence on the question other than mr.
Ann's denial the committee believes that
the circumstantial evidence that tends
to indicate that mr. Wran had
relationship of some type with either
Mexican or American intelligence is of
such a nature that the possibility
cannot be dismissed
d structure and relevancy the following
report detailing the results of this
committees investigation efforts
regarding Mexico City is divided in two
general areas one CIA surveillance
operations in Mexico City during
September and October of 1963 two
information about Lee Harvey Oswald's
stay in Mexico City that was known prior
to the assassination three
reconstruction of the CIA Mexico City
Station and headquarters activity
regarding Oswald prior to the
assassination for Mexico City reporting
of information after the assassination
five witnesses from the Cuban consulate
six investigation of related information
that was not available to the Warren
Commission and seven reconstruction of
Oswald's activities in Mexico City the
reader should be advised at the outset
that the first section following is
technical in nature and may not appear
directly relevant at first blush but the
report is cumulative in nature the
specific detailed analysis of the
standard operating procedures in the
first section are necessary to and form
a partial basis for the reconstruction
of the Mexico City station's handling of
the Oswald case there are many gaps left
by the documentary and testimonial
evidence concerning the manner in which
the CIA's Mexico City station and
headquarters reacted to Oswald's
presence in Mexico City a knowledge of
the way in which the Mexico City station
operated and the procedures involved in
those surveillance operations which
detected Oswald is valuable in filling
the gaps of the specific case which is
the subject of this report glossary of
terms used in report agent a person who
knowingly works for the CIA
a on a contract or job basis asset a
general term for persons not officers
used by the CIA for example both agents
and sources are assets an asset is
anyone used in an operation or project
whether or not that is aware that he is
being used case officer see operations
officer coverage surveillance crypto NIM
a series of letters used by the CIA to
identify someone or something while
protecting that person or things true
identity all the letters in a crypt in
them are capitalized the first two
letters are assigned by the subject
matter or locale to which the person or
thing belongs the rest of the cripton M
is randomly assigned C limited for
example the Li designates that the
project was located in Mexico
chronological file a folder in which
material is stored in chronological
order usually used for production or
communications type of material
electronic intercept base house
apartment or building that contains
equipment used in intercepting and
taping telephone conversations subject
to electronic surveillance foi a Freedom
of Information Act ymt CIA Krypton m4
photographic project aimed at the Soviet
embassy in Mexico City ladder Road CIA
Krypton M pre 1964 for surveillance
operation aimed at the Cubans in Mexico
City Li lyric CIA Krypton M assigned to
one of the three bases which provided
photographic surveillance of the Soviet
embassy in Mexico City Limerick CIA
Krypton M meaning Soviet limited CIA
Krypton M of one of three bases which
provided photographic surveillance of
the Soviet embassy in Mexico City lie
onion CIA Krypton M for photographic
surveillance operations aimed at the
Cuban diplomatic compound in Mexico City
after July 1960
or listening post see electronic
intercept bass logs a list of
photographs taken and the times they
were taken prepared by agents in the
photographic base houses monitors
redacted who worked in the electronic
intercept base listening to
conversations on telephone lines subject
to wiretap and summarizing those
conversations they deemed to be
important officer CIA career employee
operation a sub part of a project often
used interchangeably with project
Operations Officer CIA career employee
term usually used in connection with an
employee with responsibility for a
particular operational project
penetration agent an agent who works
inside a target institution for example
redacted worked for the CIA and the
Cuban embassy in Mexico City P filed
designation assigned to a personality
file in the CIA's Mexico City Station a
file for the retention of information in
written form arranged according to
individuals names photographic base
house apartment or building used for
housing of photographic surveillance
equipment and the agents who operated
always located near the target pitched
made an effort to recruit as an agent
asset or source production materials or
information generated by an operation or
project project a group or set of
operations by the CIA aimed at a
specific person institution or thing
with the aim of collecting information
influencing behavior etc project files a
folder for the retention of information
generated by or relating to a project
generally broken down into four sub
files developments and plans production
support and operations pseudonym false
name assigned to CIA officers for use in
communication channels
pulse camera a camera with a shutter
that is automatically tripped by a
triggering device activated by changes
in light density resume a daily summary
of important conversations on surveilled
telephone lines prepared by monitors in
the listening post selected out phrase
used when a foreign service officer is
retired after having been in one grade
for the maximum period of time and is
not considered qualified for promotion
to a higher grade source a person who
either wittingly or unwittingly provides
information to the CIA station a CIA
overseas installation it is the
headquarters for operations in a
particular country and is usually
located redacted the country in which it
is situated subject file folder for the
retention of information in written form
arranged by the subject matter of the
information contained target a person
institution or thing at which a project
operation or pitch is aimed the LS -
trigger device a machine which
automatically triggers the shutter of a
camera when it senses a change in light
density used along with a camera and a
spotting scope in a pulse camera